paykit thesaurus (#44)
pubky/paykit-rs: THESAURUS.md

# Paykit Thesaurus

> Canonical ubiquitous language for Paykit. Use this file before naming protocol concepts, public APIs, docs sections, files, types, fields, endpoints, events, or components.
>

> > Domain rule: the terms below win over older README/code wording when creating new names. Legacy names remain documented so existing code can be read and migrated deliberately.

Reviewer: I don't think we should keep legacy names here, or if we do we should mention they should be removed post refactoring.

## Bounded Contexts

### Paykit
- **Definition**: The whole Paykit system/product, including Paykit Protocol, Paykit Library, future Paykit Daemon work, private payments, receipts, and related components.
- **NOT**: Only the protocol layer or only the Rust library.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit SDK
- **Related terms**: Paykit Protocol, Paykit Library, Paykit Daemon

### Paykit Protocol

> - **Definition**: The domain rules, data model, and flows for payment discovery and exchange through Pubky Routing, including public Payment Lists, private payments, Payment Endpoint Identifiers, Payment References, Receipts, and Receipt Access.

Reviewer: Should avoid “public Payment Lists” here. I think `Payment List` should be visibility-neutral: a payee-controlled collection of Payment Endpoints. It can be published publicly through Pubky public storage or shared privately inside a Private Payment Envelope.

- **NOT**: A specific Rust implementation or daemon runtime.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: routing network protocol, Paykit SDK protocol
- **Related terms**: Payment List, Private Payment Envelope, Payment Endpoint Identifier, Pubky Routing

### Paykit Library
- **Definition**: The canonical product/component name for the Rust library that implements and exposes Paykit Protocol functionality to applications.
- **NOT**: A daemon, SDK, or protocol specification.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit SDK, Paykit PDK
- **Related terms**: Paykit Protocol, Paykit Daemon, Language Bindings

> ### Paykit Daemon

Reviewer: I think we want a Paykit SDK which wallets and payment processors will integrate rather than a daemon.

- **Definition**: A planned/future stateful Paykit service for payment execution, accounting, subscriptions, events, prioritization, and payment-provider orchestration.
- **NOT**: A current core component of Paykit architecture.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit core, Paykit runtime core
- **Related terms**: Paykit, Paykit Library

### Language Bindings
- **Definition**: Distribution/integration surfaces under Paykit Library for languages or platforms such as Swift, Kotlin, and React Native.
- **NOT**: First-class Paykit architecture components.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit SDK
- **Related terms**: Paykit Library

## Core Protocol Terms

### Pubky Routing
- **Definition**: Paykit's concrete routing/discovery/storage substrate in practice: Pubky public-key addressing, Pkarr discovery, and homeserver storage.
- **NOT**: A generic network abstraction in concrete Paykit docs.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Routing Network, Paykit Routing Network
- **Related terms**: Paykit Protocol, Payment List

### Payment List

> - **Definition**: The payee-published or payee-shared list of Payment Endpoints.

Reviewer: Suggested definition: “A payee-published or payee-shared collection of Payment Endpoints. A Payment List may be publicly discoverable through Pubky public storage or privately shared inside a Private Payment Envelope.”

> - **NOT**: The payer-side intersection of compatible endpoints.

Reviewer: I’d avoid defining this against a payer-side “intersection”. That intersection is not really a Paykit protocol object today. The payer can simply choose one compatible endpoint from the payee’s list without deriving or naming a separate intersection list.

- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Payment Method List, Supported Payments List, Supported Payment List when referring to the payee-published list
- **Related terms**: Payment Endpoint, Supported Payment List, Payee

> ### Supported Payment List

Reviewer: I’m not sure `Supported Payment List` belongs as a core protocol term. It sounds like application/daemon selection logic rather than something Paykit stores, sends, or returns. I’d remove this section, or move it to a future selection/application terms section.

- **Definition**: The payer-side derived intersection between the payer's supported payment capabilities/preferences and the payee's Payment List.
- **NOT**: The raw list published by the payee.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Supported Payments List, Payment Method List
- **Related terms**: Payment List, Payer, Payment Method, Payment Endpoint

### Payment Endpoint
- **Definition**: A whole payee-owned entry in a Payment List, consisting of a Payment Endpoint Identifier and a Payment Endpoint Payload.
- **NOT**: Only the address, invoice, IBAN, offer, or credential payload.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Payment Option, endpoint payload when referring to the whole entry
- **Related terms**: Payment Endpoint Identifier, Payment Endpoint Payload, Payment List

### Payment Endpoint Identifier
- **Definition**: The canonical machine-readable identifier for a payment endpoint type, such as `btc-lightning-bolt12` or `eur-sepa-iban`.
- **NOT**: The full Payment Endpoint or the payload/credential itself.

> - **Synonyms to AVOID**: PaymentEndpointIdentifier, method id, payment method id

Reviewer: I don’t think `PaymentEndpointIdentifier` should be a synonym to avoid. In docs, “Payment Endpoint Identifier” is right, but if we rename the Rust type away from `MethodId`, `PaymentEndpointIdentifier` is probably the natural code name.

### Asset
- **Definition**: The unit of value being transferred, such as BTC, EUR, USD, or USDT; in identifiers this appears as the first segment.
- **NOT**: The settlement rail or endpoint format.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: currency when the value is not specifically fiat
- **Related terms**: Payment Endpoint Identifier, Rail, Endpoint Format

### Rail
- **Definition**: The settlement system carrying the asset, such as Lightning, Bitcoin, SEPA, ACH, or Revolut; in identifiers this appears as the second segment.
- **NOT**: The asset itself or the payee-specific receiving payload.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: network when it creates ambiguity with Pubky Routing
- **Related terms**: Asset, Endpoint Format, Payment Endpoint Identifier

### Endpoint Format
- **Definition**: The handle or credential format used on a rail, such as BOLT11, BOLT12, P2TR, IBAN, address, or tag; in identifiers this appears as the third segment.
- **NOT**: The actual payee-owned payload value.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: endpoint when it is ambiguous with Payment Endpoint
- **Related terms**: Payment Endpoint Identifier, Payment Endpoint Payload

## Private Payments and Receipts

### Private Payment Envelope

> - **Definition**: The latest-state private payment disclosure sent to a Known Peer for a specific Payment Reference. It contains the private Payment Endpoints the payee is willing to share for that payment/request. Latest-wins semantics apply per Known Peer; a newer Private Payment Envelope supersedes older envelopes, even when they have different Payment References.

Reviewer: I wouldn’t start the definition with “latest-state”. The envelope should be defined by its shape/purpose first: a versioned encrypted Paykit message carrying a Payment Reference and a complete private Payment List. Latest-wins is the retrieval/update semantic and can be mentioned after that, as it already is.

> - **NOT**: A public Payment List, and not merely a private version of the list if the object includes more than endpoints.

Reviewer: If `Payment List` is visibility-neutral, I’d avoid saying this is “not” a private list. The envelope is not itself only a list because it also has `version`, `kind`, and `reference`, but it does carry a private Payment List in its `entries`.

- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Private Payment List, Private Payment Method List, private payments payload
- **Related terms**: Known Peer, Payment Endpoint, Payment Reference

### Payment Reference
- **Definition**: A per-payment or per-request correlation identifier. In private payment flows, the Private Payment Envelope carries the Payment Reference because the envelope represents the latest private payment disclosure for that payment/request.
- **NOT**: A stable relationship identifier for a known peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: peer reference, relationship reference
- **Related terms**: Private Payment Envelope, Receipt

### Receipt
- **Definition**: A Paykit receipt for a payment; Paykit receipts are always encrypted.
- **NOT**: A plain or unencrypted receipt.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: plain receipt, unencrypted receipt
- **Related terms**: Encrypted Receipt, Receipt Access, Payment Reference

> ### Encrypted Receipt

Reviewer: If all Paykit receipts are encrypted today, I’d avoid making `Encrypted Receipt` a separate canonical term.

- **Definition**: Clarifying synonym for Receipt used when emphasizing storage/security; same concept as Receipt because all Paykit receipts are encrypted.
- **NOT**: A separate receipt subtype.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: plain receipt, unencrypted receipt
- **Related terms**: Receipt, Receipt Access

### Receipt Access

> - **Definition**: The descriptor/capability that lets a counterparty retrieve and decrypt a Receipt.

Reviewer: Could this definition be more concrete? `Receipt Access` currently means the descriptor sent over the encrypted link that carries the receipt location and decryption key. It is also event-like/FIFO, unlike private payments which are latest-state. We could elaborate on it here.

- **NOT**: The Receipt payload itself.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: receipt token, receipt pointer when naming the protocol concept
- **Related terms**: Receipt, Encrypted Receipt, Payment Reference

### Counterparty
- **Definition**: The other party in a payment interaction.
- **NOT**: Necessarily a Known Peer; the counterparty may or may not have an established encrypted link.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: peer when link state matters
- **Related terms**: Known Peer, Payer, Payee

> ### Known Peer

Reviewer: I think we need to separate `Known Peer` from the linked/encrypted state. A Known Peer can be a peer we know or intend to connect with, but may or may not currently have an established encrypted link. Maybe the protocol term for a counterparty with an established encrypted link should be `Linked Peer`.

Author: I think it is good idea to rename `Known Peer` to `Linked Peer` here. Not sure if need `Known Peer` as a peer without established encrypted link as I think it basically falls under the same category of "non-implemented concepts" as  "Supoorted Payment List"

- **Definition**: A counterparty with an established encrypted link.
- **NOT**: Any arbitrary payer/payee or public-key holder.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: counterparty when the encrypted-link invariant matters
- **Related terms**: Counterparty, Private Payment Envelope

### Payer
- **Definition**: The party attempting to send value in a payment flow.
- **NOT**: Always a Known Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: sender when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payee, Supported Payment List, Counterparty

### Payee
- **Definition**: The party receiving value in a payment flow and publishing or sharing Payment Endpoints.
- **NOT**: Always a Known Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: receiver when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payer, Payment List, Payment Endpoint

> ## Legacy Terms

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't have this section, or if we keep it we should clearly mention those should not be used and will be replaced once refactoring is done.

Author: I see your point. This might be needed for refactoring. Will move to a separate file which can be removed in process of refactoring

### PrivatePaymentsPayload
- **Definition**: Former legacy implementation name for Private Payment Envelope.
- **NOT**: Canonical domain language.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: PrivatePaymentsPayload, private payments payload
- **Related terms**: Private Payment Envelope

### Paykit PDK
- **Definition**: Legacy artifact/name for earlier Paykit library work.
- **NOT**: The canonical current component name.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit PDK
- **Related terms**: Paykit Library

### Paykit FFI
- **Definition**: Implementation detail for bindings generated from Paykit Library.
- **NOT**: A first-class Paykit architecture component.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: Paykit FFI as product/component language
- **Related terms**: Paykit Library, Language Bindings

### Paykit React Native
- **Definition**: Implementation/distribution detail under Paykit Library bindings.
- **NOT**: A first-class Paykit architecture component.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: React Native Paykit as product/component language
- **Related terms**: Paykit Library, Language Bindings

## Forbidden Lexicon

These terms must not be used for new Paykit domain/protocol/component names:

> - **Paykit SDK** → use **Paykit Library**.

Reviewer: I don’t think `Paykit SDK` should be globally forbidden. As discussed, it may eventually mean a higher-level integration package that uses Paykit Library and adds convenience flows. Maybe say: “Do not use Paykit SDK to refer to the current Rust library or language bindings.”

- **Payment Method List** → use **Payment List**.

> - **Supported Payments List** → use **Supported Payment List** only for the payer-side intersection; use **Payment List** for the payee-published list.

Reviewer: If we remove `Supported Payment List` as a core protocol term, this forbidden-lexicon entry should go too. For the payee-controlled collection, use `Payment List`, and for payer-side choice/filtering, describe it as payment selection logic rather than naming a separate list.

- **Payment Option** → use **Payment Endpoint** or **Payment Method**, depending on meaning.
- **Routing Network** / **Paykit Routing Network** → use **Pubky Routing** in concrete Paykit docs.
- **MethodId** → use **Payment Endpoint Identifier**.
- **EndpointData** → use **Payment Endpoint Payload**.
- **SupportedPayments** → use **Payment List** for the payee-published list.
- **PrivatePaymentsPayload** → use **Private Payment Envelope**.

> - **Private Payment Method List** / **Private Payment List** → use **Private Payment Envelope** when referring to known-peer private payment data.

Reviewer: I’d soften this. “Private Payment List” may be useful when referring specifically to the private list carried inside an envelope. What we should avoid is calling the whole `Private Payment Envelope` a list, because the envelope also has message metadata and latest-wins semantics.

- **Payment Endpoint** for only address/invoice/IBAN/etc. data → use **Payment Endpoint Payload**.

> ## Component Model

Reviewer: The component model should probably remove `Supported Payment List` and add current missing concepts like `Encrypted Link`, `Linked Peer`, `Encrypted Link Handshake`, `Receipt Decryption Key`, `Pubky Homeserver`, and `Private Message Kind`. I’d also avoid listing old implementation names here once we decide to rename them.

- **Related terms**: Counterparty, Encrypted Link, Private Payment Envelope

### Payer
- **Definition**: The party attempting to send value in a payment flow.
- **NOT**: Always a Linked Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: sender when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payee, Counterparty

### Payee
- **Definition**: The party receiving value in a payment flow and publishing or sharing Payment Endpoints.
- **NOT**: Always a Linked Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: receiver when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payer, Payment List, Payment Endpoint

## Forbidden Lexicon

These terms must not be used for new Paykit domain/protocol/component names:

- **Payment Method List** → use **Payment List**.
- **Payment Option** → use **Payment Endpoint** or **Payment Method**, depending on meaning.
- **Routing Network** / **Paykit Routing Network** → use **Pubky Routing** in concrete Paykit docs.
- **MethodId** → use **Payment Endpoint Identifier**.
- **EndpointData** → use **Payment Endpoint Payload**.
- **SupportedPayments** → use **Payment List** for the payee-published list.
- **PrivatePaymentsPayload** → use **Private Payment Envelope**.

> - **Private Payment Method List** / **Private Payment List** → use **Private Payment Envelope** when referring to known-peer private payment data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Private Payment List** for the whole private message → use **Private Payment Envelope**. Use **Payment List** when referring only to the endpoint collection carried inside the envelope.
- **Private Payment Method List** → use **Payment List** or **Private Payment Envelope**, depending on whether you mean the endpoint collection or the whole private message.
```

- **NOT**: The Private Application Message body or the Rust enum/type that may represent it in an implementation.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: private message type when naming the protocol concept
- **Related terms**: Private Application Message, Private Payment Envelope, Receipt Access

### Latest-State Message
- **Definition**: A private message semantic where only the newest valid message of that kind matters.
- **NOT**: An Event Message where every valid message must be preserved and processed in send order.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: latest-wins message when naming the protocol concept
- **Related terms**: Private Application Message, Private Message Kind, Event Message, Private Payment Envelope

### Event Message
- **Definition**: A private Paykit message where every valid message matters and receivers must process messages in send order.
- **NOT**: A Latest-State Message where newer messages supersede older messages of the same kind.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: event-like message when naming the protocol concept
- **Related terms**: Private Application Message, Private Message Kind, Latest-State Message, Receipt Access

### Private Payment Envelope

> - **Definition**: a versioned encrypted Paykit message carrying a specific Payment Reference and a complete Payment List of a Know Peer. Latest-State Message semantics apply; a newer Private Payment Envelope supersedes older envelopes, even when they have different Payment References.

Reviewer: Small wording issue here: `Know Peer` should be `Linked Peer`.

- **NOT**: The established Encrypted Link itself or subsequent private Paykit application messages sent over it.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: link setup when naming the protocol concept
- **Related terms**: Encrypted Link, Linked Peer

### Linked Peer
- **Definition**: A counterparty with an established Encrypted Link.
- **NOT**: Any arbitrary payer/payee or public-key holder.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: counterparty when the encrypted-link invariant matters
- **Related terms**: Counterparty, Encrypted Link, Private Payment Envelope

### Payer
- **Definition**: The party attempting to send value in a payment flow.
- **NOT**: Always a Linked Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: sender when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payee, Counterparty

### Payee
- **Definition**: The party receiving value in a payment flow and publishing or sharing Payment Endpoints.
- **NOT**: Always a Linked Peer.
- **Synonyms to AVOID**: receiver when it obscures payment role
- **Related terms**: Payer, Payment List, Payment Endpoint

## Forbidden Lexicon

These terms must not be used for new Paykit domain/protocol/component names:

- **Payment Method List** → use **Payment List**.

> - **Payment List** for the payee-published list.

Reviewer: This bullet looks inverted. `Payment List` is the term we want for the payee-published or payee-shared list, so I think this line should be removed.
